Hi, I'm Jake Behrens,
Apple's UI Frameworks Evangelist.
Getting your application
architecture right is crucial
to creating a great iOS app.
Today, you're going to learn how to take
advantage of View Controller Containment
on iOS to make the most of your code,
and to make it easier to extend
your app's functionality later on.
You're also going to learn how to use the
Appearance API to create a custom look
and feel for your app quickly and easily.
Finally, you're going to learn some tips
and tricks to help you prepare
for extending your app for
international markets later on,
without having to redo a lot of
the code that you've already done.
So let's get started.
When you have a new
idea for an application,
you want to cement that
idea as quickly as possible.
Typically, you start off with something
that looks a lot like this.
You start off with a paper prototype,
or maybe just a scribble on a napkin.
Then after some time,
you work with a graphic designer,
or maybe you do some
graphic design yourself,
and you create a mockup that starts
looking like a full application.
Now you just need to actually
build the application.
But how are you going
to do this effectively?
What does your application's
architecture look like?
How do you ensure that pieces of this
application are reusable later on?
How are you going to get the
custom look and feel that
your graphic designer wants?
You can see that there's a wood
green texture in the navigation bar,
a custom font with its own custom color,
and you also have a custom
tint on the bar button item.
How are you going to do this without
creating a lot of custom views?
Your graphic designer also wants
a custom photo picker presented
when the user taps on a photo.
But this photo picker has
its own custom look and feel.
Finally, once your application is on
the store and doing well,
how do you move this into another market
and make localization easier up front?
How do you make sure that the
work you do now isn't work that
you're just going to have to do
all over again for each language?
What are some things you can
do now to save time later?
Let's start with
application architecture.
On iOS, there are different types
of controller objects.
Today, we're going to focus
on the View Controller.
The View Controller is one of the
building blocks of creating applications.
But more to the point,
the View Controller's primary purpose
is to manage a hierarchy of views.
These views are responsible
for drawing content,
handling multi-touch events,
and managing the layout of
any of their own sub-views.
Now, the View Controller may also
connect to a model and present
data to the user through views.
Conversely,
it may take data that the user
has entered into a text field
and push that down to the model.
But its primary purpose is to
manage its hierarchy of views.
A View Controller should
also be encapsulated.
Its functionality should not
be dependent upon any other
View Controller if at all possible.
There are three main types
of View Controllers on iOS.
There are System View Controllers,
and these are system-provided
View Controllers that
are part of the iOS SDK.
Then there are Content View Controllers,
and these are custom
View Controllers that you create.
Then there are Container Controllers.
Container Controllers handle
layouts and application flow,
and I'm going to focus on these today.
First are System Controllers.
These are view controllers
that we provide to you,
such as the Tweet Sheet
and the Image Picker.
Now, keep in mind that these really drive
home the point of encapsulation.
All of these controllers can
be presented from virtually
anywhere in your application,
and they work independently
of your application.
If you look at the Image Picker,
you get the navigation
between photo albums,
the image previews,
and the image thumbnails that scroll.
This is all work that
you don't have to create.
You don't have to write this code,
and we've provided you all of this
within the Image Picker itself,
so that you can focus on the core
functionality of your application.
Then there are Content View Controllers.
These are custom view
controllers that you create.
These are typically a subclass
of UI View Controller or
UI Table View Controller,
and these usually represent some
encapsulated content and functionality
that is specific to your application.
Then we have Container Controllers.
Examples of these controllers
are the Navigation Controller,
the Tab Bar Controller,
and with the introduction
of the iPad and iOS 3.2,
we introduced the Split View Controller.
These containers allow you to
present multiple view controllers
on screen at the same time,
transition between view controllers,
and define your application layout.
Before iOS 5, you couldn't create your
own custom containers.
But now you can.
To start, let's look at a great example
of a container controller.
Here is the interface
for Mail on the iPad.
You can see on the left
there's this list of messages,
and on the right there's the detail
of the currently selected message.
Now, if you look at this head on,
it may look like there are
just two view controllers.
But if we break this apart,
we start to see that
there's a lot more going on.
So let's walk through how
this interface breaks down.
[Transcript missing]
Let's go over some of the basics
of what a Container Controller is.
First, a Container is a
UIViewController subclass.
It's just like a regular View Controller,
the only difference is that you can
add and remove child View Controllers.
Remember that since a Container
is just a regular View Controller,
it can also manage its
own view hierarchy.
You also get some things
for free with a Container,
such as automatic appearance
and rotation method forwarding
to the child View Controllers.
You don't have to call ViewWillAppear,
ViewDidAppear,
and so forth on the children.
These are all forwarded by
the parent Container for you.
So let's look at the application
that you're building.
How are you going to break this up?
Well, the system provided containers
don't really work well here.
A tab bar controller doesn't really
work because you don't have tabs.
And you don't want to use a navigation
controller because there isn't a full
transition away from the main screen.
Now, this is a bit of a crude example
since there is a navigation bar,
but the reason why there is a navigation
bar is so that you can get the
title and button placement for free.
So first,
you're going to create a container,
which is a Photo Container
View Controller.
And this is going to be the root
view controller of your window.
So its view will be used as
the content view of the window.
Then, you're going to add four of
these photo view controllers,
and these are just
segmented to be top left,
top right, bottom left, and bottom right.
And since a container is
a regular view controller,
and can manage its own view hierarchy,
you can add the UI navigation bar
to the container's view hierarchy.
To look at this another way,
if you look at the hierarchy,
you can see that the Photo Container
View Controller is the parent.
It's the Container View Controller.
Then, added as children to the container,
are each of these four
Photo View Controller Content View Cont
rollers.
If you get into a situation where
each of these children are needing
to know information about each other,
you probably want to look at
your architecture again because
something has gone wrong.
Each of these should be encapsulated
pieces of functionality,
as I mentioned earlier.
Additionally,
you'll notice that the arrow is pointing
down from the parent to the children.
The parent sends messages down
to the child view controllers.
However, usually the children don't
talk back to the parent.
If you find that you need
two-way communication,
this is a great opportunity to
use properties and delegates.
Okay, so you've opened up Xcode,
and you've made the
Photo Container View Controller,
and that's set as the
Windows Root View Controller.
Then you added in the navigation bar,
set its title, and added the bar button
item on the right.
Now you have something that looks
like the start of an application.
You just need to add the
child view controllers.
So how are you going to do that?
Well, you need to do a little bit
of setup in your container.
First, you're going to declare a
property for each of the child
content view controllers.
This is so that you can know if one of
the view controllers has been set or not.
Then,
you're going to implement a custom setter
method for each of these properties.
This is where you're going to add
the child content view controllers.
So let's take a look at what this
code looks like in the container.
Here,
you see the ContainersViewDidLoad method.
The first thing you need
to do is instantiate one of
the PhotoViewControllers.
Once you have that created,
you're going to set that new
instance of a PhotoViewController
to be the top left ViewController.
And since the PhotoViewController
is just a simple ViewController
with a UIImageView,
you want to create a property for
the ImageView's image so that you
can set the image of the ImageView to
be whatever you want later.
Now, you would write this
code four more times,
one time for each of these segments.
However, the code is the same.
So I'm just going to
show you one example,
and you can assume that the code
for the others is exactly the same.
So next, let's take a look at that
Custom Setter method.
The first thing you want to do is check
to see if the View Controller that
has been passed in is the same as
the current top left View Controller.
If it is the same,
you don't want to do anything.
You just want to move on.
But if they're different,
then you're going to set the top
left View Controller to be this
newly passed in View Controller.
And once you do that,
you're going to call
Add Child View Controller.
You're going to add the new
top left View Controller as
a child to the container.
This creates the controller hierarchy
and the parent-child relationship.
[Transcript missing]
So now, you've added the first
child view controller,
and you can see that your application
is starting to look complete.
You just need to write the
custom setter method for the
other child view controllers,
and do it three more times.
Now, if you stopped here with your code,
what happens if you want to remove
one of these photo view controllers?
What if you want to swap it out
with a different view controller?
How are you going to do that?
Well, let's take another look at
the custom setter method.
You're still checking to see if the view
controller that's passed in is already
the view controller set for that segment.
If not, then now you're going to call
remove from super view on the
photo view controller's view,
which is going to remove that view
from the container's view hierarchy.
Then you need to call remove
from parent view controller.
You're going to call this on
the top left view controller,
so you're removing that view controller
from the controller hierarchy.
Once this is done,
you're going to set the newly
passed in view controller to be
the top left view controller.
And again, you're going to call add child
view controller passing in
the top left view controller.
Then you're going to set the photo
view controller's views frame to be
where you want it to show up on screen.
And then finally,
you're going to add the photo
view controller's view to
the top left view controller.
And then finally,
you're going to set the photo
view controller's view to the
container's view hierarchy.
So you've added it to both the controller
hierarchy and the view hierarchy.
Adding and removing the child to and from
both hierarchies is extremely important.
If you don't do both,
you can wind up in a bad state.
So here is the container
and its view hierarchy,
and a child and its view hierarchy.
Now, if all you did was call AddSubView,
you can see that there's an issue.
Now you have two view controllers
pointing to the same view,
the child controller's view.
This is an issue because appearance
and rotation methods may now be called
multiple times on that child's view.
This can be hard to debug
sometimes because you can
see the content on screen,
but the controller
hierarchy isn't correct.
So you want to make sure that you're
doing both steps of this process.
Here you have the same setup as before,
but this time you're calling
AddChildViewController,
and adding the child to
the controller hierarchy.
This means that appearance and rotation
methods will come from the parent and
flow through the child controller.
Then you're calling
AddChildViewController,
and adding the child's view to
the container's view hierarchy.
This is good.
Now the child's view will
only get the appearance and
rotation methods called once,
and children, once added to a parent,
should stay there unless
removed properly first.
Be aware that you may run into
issues if you don't follow this rule.
Here's another issue
that you could run into:
an inconsistent hierarchy exception.
This example is similar to the last one,
except in this situation,
the Photo View Controller was
previously added as a child
to a UI Navigation Controller.
So now,
if you were to call AddSubView and
add the Photo View Controller's view
to the Container's view hierarchy,
you're going to get an hierarchy
inconsistency exception.
This is because the
Photo View Controller already
has a parent.
So when you call AddSubView on its view,
the parent controller should be the
Photo Container View Controller.
But currently,
the Photo View Controller is still a
child of the UI Navigation Controller.
And since these don't match,
the controller chain is incorrect,
and you'll receive this exception.
In the console, this is the output that
you'll see for this situation.
It may not seem helpful at first,
but it is.
If we break it down to be more readable,
we can walk through it and find exactly
where the problem is in our code.
If we follow through it,
it's saying that the
child view controller,
in this case the photo view controller,
should have a parent view controller that
is a photo container view controller.
However, in this case,
its actual parent is currently set
to be a UI navigation controller.
This means that somewhere in our code,
we've called addChildViewController,
passing in a photo view controller,
and we've called it on the
UI navigation controller.
So you can look through your
code and find out where the
issue is and correct it.
So now your architecture
is set up correctly,
and your application is looking great.
But your graphic designer has
reminded you that you need to
create the custom photo picker
for when a user taps on a photo.
How are you going to do this?
You used to have to do this modally,
but on iOS 5,
we've made it so that you don't have to.
First, you need to do some setup in
the Photo View Controller.
You're going to add a Tap Gesture
Recognizer to each of the
Photo View Controller's views.
This makes it so that when
a user taps on a photo,
you can fire a method.
Naturally,
next you need to write a method that
presents the Photo Picker Controller.
So let's take a look at that method.
In the PhotoViewController,
you've created a method
called ShowPhotopicker.
First, you need to instantiate
the PhotoPicker controller.
Then, you're going to call
PresentViewControllerAnimatedCompletion.
If you've used this API before,
you may notice that it has changed.
We've removed the modal
part from the name,
because you no longer have to
present View Controllers modally.
We've also added a completion
handler where you can use a block
to execute some code once the
View Controller has been presented.
Again, if you stop there and tap a photo,
it comes up full screen.
Why is that?
Well, you need to do some additional
setup to get the effect you want.
Let's look at the
Show Photo Picker method again.
You need to set Defines
Presentation Context to Yes on
the Photo View Controller.
This makes the Photo View Controller the
current presentation
context for the application.
When the View Controller was
presented modally,
that was because by default,
the Windows Root View Controller is
the current presentation context.
Now, we've specifically defined it
to be our Photo View Controller.
Next,
you want to set the modal presentation
style of the Photo Picker to be the
currently defined presentation context.
In this case, the Photo View Controller.
As an aside,
we've also added a Presenting
View Controller property that
you can access from within
a presented View Controller.
This saves you from having to look up
view hierarchies and try and figure
out who presented the View Controller.
So now you're done.
Your architecture is set up,
and when you tap a photo,
you get your photo picker presented in
the way your graphic designer wanted.
The other great thing about presenting
your View Controllers the way you want,
is that your users can still
interact with the content on
the rest of the screen while a
View Controller is presented.
So let's wrap up.
On iOS 5, you can now create custom
container view controllers.
These let you define your own
layouts and application flow.
You also want to make sure that
your child content view controllers
are encapsulated functionality.
They should not be dependent
upon other children.
You also want to make sure
that you're respecting the
controller and view hierarchies.
You've seen some of the issues
that you can run into if you don't.
But you also know how to fix them now.
Finally, we've made presenting view
controllers much easier,
and we've given you more
flexibility to present view
controllers the way you want.
Next,
let's talk about interface customization,
and how you get that custom look
and feel that your graphic designer
created in your initial mockup.
On the iPad,
the default look and feel is a
combination of silver and gray tones.
You can see that here in the navigation
bar and in the bar button item,
and when you present your photo picker.
But your graphic designer wants
this custom look and feel.
In the past,
it's been a little bit tough to get
this custom look and feel easily.
You've had to create custom views
and do a lot of heavy lifting.
And then every time the OS updates,
if we've changed anything internally,
then you have to change
things on your end as well.
Well, now you don't have to do that,
because we've introduced the
new Appearance API on iOS 5.
With the Appearance API on iOS 5,
we've added tint colors to
almost every UI element.
We've also added background images
to elements like the navigation bar,
the tab bar, and the toolbar.
So let's see how you can start
implementing the look and feel
you want in your application.
To get the navigation bar background,
you call setBackgroundImage for
bar metrics on the navigation bar.
Here, you're passing in a UI image
for the background image,
and for the bar metrics,
you've passed in UIBarMetricsDefault.
This is for portrait orientations
on the iPhone and iPod Touch,
and all orientations for the iPad,
since the navigation bar doesn't
change size with orientation changes.
We've also added
UIBarMetricsLandscapePhone so that you
can use this for landscape orientations
on the iPhone and iPod Touch.
So now that you've set the background
image for that specific navigation bar,
well, you don't want to have to do
this every time you have a
navigation bar in your application.
You just want to apply it to all of them.
So how can you do that?
On iOS 5,
we've not only added the Appearance API,
but we've added an AppearanceProxy.
And this is a way for you
to set these properties,
such as the background image,
on your navigation bar throughout
your entire application.
You call the Appearance method
on the UINavigationBar class,
and then set the background image for
the specific bar metrics that you want.
This will now apply the appearance to all
navigation bars within your application.
So this is great.
Now that you have that
woodgrain background,
you just need to change the
font for the title and the tint
color for the bar button item.
Let's look at how to do those.
To set the title to a different font,
you're going to use the same appearance
method on your UI navigation bar,
so it applies to all
your navigation bars.
And you'll use another method,
which is Set Title Text Attributes.
This takes a dictionary
of text attributes,
and you can change
things such as the font,
the text color, the text shadow color,
and the shadow offset.
On iOS 5, we have 58 built-in fonts,
so you can have a lot of variety.
Then, for the bar button item,
you're going to call Set Tint Color,
again using the appearance method
on the UI Bar Button Item class,
so that this applies to all the bar
button items in your application.
And this tint color has been set to
something that's going to mesh well
with the navigation bar's background.
Great.
So now you have the navigation
bar looking the way you want.
You have the custom font
with the color that you want,
and you've set the tint
color to be what you want.
But if you tap on the photo,
you see that the navigation bar for
the photo picker looks identical to the
main navigation bar in the application.
Your graphic designer reminds
you that you need to have this
beautiful brown tint color instead.
So how can you narrowly define
rules so that you can get this
look and feel for the photo picker?
[Transcript missing]
For the title text, you're going to do
exactly the same thing.
You're going to set up an
NSDictionary of text attributes,
where you alter the font,
maybe you change the color,
and then you call
AppearanceWhenContainedIn on
the UINavigationBar class,
passing in the
PhotoPickerViewController class,
and you set the text attributes to be
the new dictionary that you've defined.
Now, when you have a navigation
bar in a PhotoPicker,
its text attributes are these values.
So now if you tap on a photo,
you can see that the tint
color is what you want,
and the font is what you want,
but the background image is still
showing over the tint color.
Why is that?
Well,
if you look at the original code that set
the background image for all navigation
bars to be this woodgrain background,
you used the appearance
method on UI Navigation Bar.
Meaning, all navigation bars now
have this background image.
But when a navigation bar has
a background and a tint color,
the background image wins.
So in this case,
you need to use Appearance
When Contained In,
passing in the
PhotoPickerViewController class,
and set that background image to
nil for the UI Navigation Bar class.
This allows the beautiful
tint color to show through.
So now when you tap on the photo,
you get the photo picker
and it looks exactly the way
your graphic designer wants.
Great.
Now let's look at some of
the implementation details of
the Appearance Proxy in API.
Just before Layout Subviews is called,
we evaluate these containment rules
that you've set up for your application.
Then the specific
customizations are applied,
and know that these updates are only
applied when the view hierarchy changes.
So if you're looking to
do this in real time,
it's not going to work the
way you may be expecting.
Additionally,
instance methods have been tagged
with a #define UIAppearanceSelector.
This lets you look at the
headers for our classes,
such as UIButton or UIBarButtonItem,
and you can see which methods have
opted into the appearance proxy.
We also leave your
custom appearances alone.
If you've applied a specific
customization to a single instance of,
say, a UI button, we won't overwrite your
specific customization.
When we evaluate containment rules,
we will see your specific customization
to a single instance of an object,
and we won't apply
appearances to that instance.
So, you can see,
we've made extensive additions to UIKit.
And with the Appearance API,
you can really get the look and
feel you want in your application.
We've also set up containment rules
using Appearance When Contained In,
so that you can granularly define a
custom look and feel for different
areas of your application.
We leave single instances alone if
you've customized them specifically.
So anything that you create,
we're not just going to stomp on.
Finally,
let's talk about some tips and tricks.
Some things you can do now in your
application and development to
ensure that you don't have to do
a lot of work over again later on.
One of the things that we've added in
iOS 5 is image stretching and tiling.
We did this for performance gains when
using images that you need to resize.
You can create an image that's
resizable and set insets so that the
image stretches or tiles appropriately
and still looks the way it should.
This makes it a lot easier to do
localization within your applications.
Here, if I set the insets
on this image to be 0,
1, 0, 1, this goes from top, left,
to bottom, to right.
So I haven't inset the top or bottom,
but I have set the left
and right by one point.
Right.
You can see in this image that
I have rounded corners that
I still want to look rounded,
but I want the rest of the
image to resize appropriately,
and this ensures that the middle
section is resized and stretched.
You can also do this with a larger image,
and that middle section
will be tiled across.
So if you have an image with
a pattern in the middle,
you can resize that,
and we will tile the center of
the image and do the right thing
to make sure it looks correct.
You can also do this as a 9-part
image by setting the insets to
be a value all around the image.
Here, my insets are 1, 1, 1, 1,
meaning that the center of this image
is going to be stretched and tiled
appropriately so that it looks correct
if I change the height and width.
We've also done this to
animated images on iOS.
You can take an image
that you've created,
use a file name with a
number at the end of it,
and we will iterate through those
files and you can set the duration
and the insets so that you can resize
the image and it'll still animate.
Another area where you can benefit
from image stretching and tiling
is in your application bundle size.
You may find the size increasing
over time if you've made your
application universal and have
support for a few languages.
You may be reaching the
cellular download size limit,
but we're going to be stretching
and tiling images to make sure that
you don't have more images than
needed for subtle size changes.
Next, let's talk about the
keyboard on the iPad.
The keyboard has traditionally been
docked at the bottom of the screen,
but with iOS 5,
we've added the ability for users
to undock and split the keyboard.
This means that your content
needs to move and reflow according
to where the keyboard is.
You want to ensure that
specific UI elements are not
obstructed by the keyboard.
No matter where the keyboard is,
the user should still be able to
interact with your application.
We've added some keyboard
notifications to UI Window,
and this is in the form of
Keyboard Will Change Frame and
Keyboard Did Change Frame.
So you can know where the frame of the
keyboard is and where it has been so
that you can relay out your content
appropriately so that you're not
obstructing key areas of your interface.
Something else I've seen,
though not exclusive to iOS 5,
is anchoring views to
the top of the keyboard.
If you have a view anchored
to the top of the keyboard,
you want to be sure that
you're doing this correctly.
I've seen where the view's frame
is hard-coded to specific values,
and this can hurt you later on if
we change the size of the keyboard.
In this example, we see that iMessage is
doing the right thing.
Maybe your user is using
the Japanese keyboard,
which has an auto-correction bar
across the top of the keyboard.
Suddenly,
the frame of the keyboard is different,
and you need to account for this so
that the text field is still on screen.
You want to ensure that the user
can interact with your content.
So you want to make sure that
if you're anchoring a view
to the top of the keyboard,
you want to observe
the Keyboard Will Show,
Keyboard Did Show, Keyboard Will Hide,
and Keyboard Did Hide notifications.
These notifications will
give you user info keys,
such as where the
keyboard's frame begins,
where it ends,
what the animation duration time is,
and what the animation curve is.
When you observe these notifications,
you can fire a method that may
have a UI view block animation,
or maybe you're doing some core
animation to move your anchored view.
But you can do this knowing where
the frame of the keyboard is.
You can do this with the
same exact animation time,
and in the same exact type of animation.
Everything works together and
looks very fluid to the user.
So now you have a
checklist of next steps.
First, you want to check and see
that you're stretching and
tiling images where you can.
This keeps your bundle size low,
and we've also done many optimizations
under the hood to make sure
that the performance is great.
You also want to avoid putting text
in images when at all possible.
In some situations you may have to,
but in others you want to make sure that
you're drawing the text over the image
or using something like a UI button
with a background image so that if
you're localizing for another language,
what may be a certain length
in one language may be a
different length in another.
You want to ensure that you're
not having to create images for
all these different languages.
So now you have a
checklist of next steps.
First, you want to check and see
that you're stretching and
tiling images where you can.
This keeps your bundle size low,
and we've also done many optimizations
under the hood to make sure
that the performance is great.
Finally,
you want to use the frames that the
keyboard notifications give you.
You want to ensure that you're
moving your content so that
wherever the keyboard is,
the interaction with your application
is not obstructed for the user.
So today, you've learned how to use
View Controller Containment
to create dynamic and robust
layouts for your applications.
You've also seen how easy it is to use
the Appearance API to create a wonderful
custom look and feel for your app.
And going forward,
you can utilize the tips and
tricks you've learned to be
proactive to make extending your
app in the future even easier.
I can't wait to see how you use
this information to make your new
apps and existing apps even better.